In ongoing interdisciplinary research led by Leslie Collins of Duke ECE, Kyle Bradbury of Duke’s Energy Data Analytics Lab and Tim Johnson of the Nicholas School of the Environment, Duke undergraduate teams use machine learning to assess U.S. solar capacity and energy consumption—providing valuable data to inform smart grid infrastructure planning.

Duke’s nationally recognized Data+ program brings teams of faculty and students together each summer to explore data-driven approaches to real-world problems—including many from clients such as Accenture, Fidelity Charitable and Duke Health. Impactful projects like the ones below will soon become part of every Duke Engineering undergraduate’s experience with the debut of an innovative new Data Science course.

SOLAR COUNTS
With enough solar installations to power 6 million homes, the U.S. energy infrastructure is rapidly evolving. But while individual states track solar locations and capacities on a broad scale, there is little information about exactly where solar energy is emerging on a city or neighborhood level.
With this more precise data, officials could predict where to install new technology to meet changing demands, social scientists could better understand how policy affects solar energy adoption and economists could better value the future of the 8,000 solar companies employing more than 200,000 American workers.
 
Data & the Duke Engineer - Read more about Duke Engineering's ambitious initiatives in data science education and researchIt’s a gigantic undertaking of great importance, but Duke has just the people for the job—our undergraduates, who recently began figuring out how to tally solar capacity from satellite imagery through Duke’s Data+ Program.
A small group of four students, mentored by graduate students and faculty from Duke Engineering and Duke’s Energy Initiative, spent the summer building a dataset by meticulously annotating 58 square miles of satellite imagery of Fresno, California. The team then coded their own proof-of-principle machine learning algorithm that was able to identify solar panels with over 90 percent accuracy.
The group then passed the baton to Bass Connections—a program at Duke supporting interdisciplinary collaborations between faculty and students. Led by the same faculty, undergraduates expanded the dataset to include three more cities in California, annotating 20,000 individual solar panels from 1.5 billion pixels of satellite imagery from the U.S. Geological Survey.
The students recently published the massive dataset in an open, online journal, providing other researchers worldwide with ground-truth data that could help program algorithms to spot all types of objects from the sky.